About 80% of the global population
without electricity live on a single
continent.
>> Satellite imagery of African cities
compared [music] to satellite imagery of
Western cities at night. You can see the
darkness versus the light.
>> This lack of power matters. Electricity
consumption and GDP growth are closely
linked. In fact, virtually every wealthy
nation on the planet uses power
abundantly. And this isn't just about
keeping the lights on. It's about
economic independence.
>> Electricity is a fundamental right.
Without that, you can't have health,
education, anything delivered.
>> It also holds back industrialization.
>> Pretty much any other [music] country in
the history of the world, the way they
got rich is via [music]
industrialization
>> and mass production with its assembly
lines.
>> That all happened because they had power
of one sort of another. And that's been
true for everyone from the UK to the US
to more recently the likes of Singapore,
Taiwan, and South Korea. But why isn't
Africa, the continent with the most
sunshine hours in the world, getting the
energy it needs for its own industrial
revolution? Finding the cash for vast
energy projects is one thing. The size
of investment is a hurdle. It's huge. A
country needs 1,000 to 2,000 kwatt hours
of energy [music] per person per year to
take off. And in many African countries,
that number is at less than 200 kwatt
hours per person [music] per year. So
we're way off in terms of where we need
to be.
[music]
To say Africa is energy poor is in many
ways a mischaracterization.
The continent is incredibly rich in
natural resources.
>> To show minerals globally, Africa is
home to around 3%. If it comes to crude
and gas in particular, we're looking
around 10%. There's enormous potential
on the hydropower side. Solar is also
untapped. There's also a substantial
labor force.
>> A billion and a half people. Median age
in Africa is 19. This giant young
workforce to power [music] the future.
But despite its vast potential, Africa's
lack of functioning energy
infrastructure brings huge challenges
for industry.
>> We are using some world class inspection
machine like as you can see there body
defect.
>> All are rejected
>> in places like [music] Nigeria, the most
populous country in Africa. There just
isn't enough power being generated or
distributed. [music] Manufacturers have
been forced to essentially abandon the
grid. Better glassass a top performer on
Nigeria's stock exchange which produces
packaging for Budweiser Coca-Cola and
Heineken has been forced to do just that
you know right we cannot connect to
national grid because frequently we are
having power failure because of that we
are having different source of power
backup
>> including liqufied natural gas delivered
by tanker and a solar power plant
mounted on the roof. These backups are
helping scale the business, but they're
a luxury only a large company can
afford. Across much of Africa, smaller
firms are instead using these. A country
can't industrialize using diesel power
generators because it's expensive. It's
a very expensive option with which to
operate factories and it makes you
uncompetitive.
>> It's just not sufficient to do mass
industrialization, mass manufacturing.
It's not the kind of thing that can
power enough to generate the kind of
jobs that the next billion Africans
need.
>> The choice between unreliable energy or
expensive energy is hampering African
industry. The continent accounts for
just 1% of global manufactured exports.
But if energy access is so crucial for
industrialization, why isn't more being
done to fix the problem?
>> Investment is an issue. It's got huge
sunk costs and long payment schedules.
>> Other factors are political risk and
corruption. These are major inhibitors
for investment because it's tough to get
past western compliance rules in order
to invest. Governance and political
stability. If you're an investor and
you're looking to invest in those
countries and there's a change in
[music] administration, you're concerned
whether the contract you signed would be
adhered to.
This is a major issue when considering
that most financing for energy projects
comes from the commercial sector.
On top of that, loans to African
countries come with what many regard as
unjustifiably high interest rates,
far higher than countries with similar
debt to GDP ratios.
>> Why should African countries borrow so
expensive as compared to its peers in
other parts of the world?
In spite of many of these hurdles, some
African nations are still pressing ahead
with massive power projects. And this
500 ft wall of reinforced concrete is
one of the most ambitious. The Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam.
[music]
Construction began in 2011 and has been
plagued by delays and strong opposition
from Egypt which sits downstream. It's
Africa's largest hydroelect electric
powered dam. So it's quite a huge
achievement for the continent and
Ethiopia in particular. Their plan is
also to export to their neighbors.
Daniela Bayen and Abanesha are two of
the over 60 million Ethiopians who live
without power. They hope the dam will
bring electricity to their home.
[music]
The couple even gave money to help fund
the construction through a government
program.
It made it into kind of like a
nationalist project where people
donated, people bought [music]
domestic bonds.
>> Uh civil servants were also encouraged
to contribute as well as the vast
diaspora that uh Ethiopia has. [music]
It's something they're very proud of.
Funding energy infrastructure through
crowdsourcing is just one way Africans
are taking energy security into their
own hands. Green technology is another.
The continent has some of the best
potential solar sites worldwide. And
from Nigeria to South Africa and
Morocco, solar panels are now being
imported from China at a rapid rate.
There's actually a significant increase
in the 12 months to June mounted in
total at around 15 gawatt of solar
panels that were imported demonstrating
the demand uh for power. Is it
transformational? Absolutely.
Particularly for rural areas where
national grids do not extend [music] to.
At a step above that, governments are
starting to partner with private [music]
companies to do mini grids. These are
small power plants that could be
renewable and will power say a
neighborhood or an industrial estate and
just introducing power to that
agricultural rural community just helps
in terms of the multiply effect of
allowing other businesses to emerge.
This is partly why the World Bank has
launched an initiative to get power to
300 million Africans by 2030. The
investment comes with a caveat.
Countries must choose the lowest cost
solutions which are almost always
renewable.
>> So we can connect 300 600 million people
into power in no time at all. We don't
need to beat cables. We don't need to
have trucks to move diesel around. We
just need to put it on their house and
build it.
>> But some argue that the [music] broader
push to prioritize green energy by
international institutions and policy
makers has made it difficult for African
countries to obtain funding for fossil
fuel-based projects.
This has irked many African leaders who
want fuel, any fuel to help lift their
nations out of poverty.
2015 which was a restriction placed on
future emissions which um African
countries found unfair.
>> It's not going to bring a just
transition to people around the world.
>> This idea that western [music] countries
could get rich by burning fossil fuels.
But Africa should learn from those
mistakes [music] strikes a lot of people
as condescending and hypocritical.
Solving Africa's energy insecurity may
seem like the continent's problem, but
the knock-on effects of an electrified
Africa will be global.
If there are jobs in Africa, if there is
hope for the future, you're far less
likely to find [music] young African
citizens wanting to leave.
>> An energy secure Africa [music] would
create a more secure world. We've got a
massive group of young people and yet
there isn't a manufacturing sector
that's available to absorb them.
>> Starting a workers being dominated by
local employees means if I move to
another factory I take my experience to
here in Africa. So I don't take it to
another countries.
>> It's in the interest of everyone around
the world that [music] the last
continent that hasn't gone through an
industrial revolution does. The argument
you'd hear from many African policy
makers is whether it's through burning
fossil fuels or through some kind
[music] of green energy transition, they
don't think that matters as much as the
fact that it [music] needs to happen.
[music]